Hi, welcome back now to
our next lecture in our
FinTech module called
real estate Tech or real Tech
in some in some parlance.
Real estate is an incredibly
interesting area
in part because of
the size of the space
by almost any measure.
Real estate which is
sometimes classified as
a so-called alternative
investment is vast,
as an asset class,
as an area of interest,
and certainly as an area of
identified interest
with respect to
FinTech digital methods
and technologies.
Also interest by those who
overlap in both areas.
It's called alternative although,
depending upon
your phenomenology or
your metaphysics you might
presume that real estate
proceeded humanity.
There in other words was probably
real estate before humans.
Real estate around
the globe is a large area.
Getting a handle on exactly
how large either with respect to
market cap or valuation
or returns as
a challenge in part because
of its vast nature.
How we define it,
how we track it, and so on.
But what's clear is
that it's very large.
To give you a sense
around the globe sales of
commercial properties as of
a most recent mark-to-market
here fiscal year 2017
was almost a trillion
dollars US dollars.
Within the United States
just the commercial section
of what we call real estate
asset classes in fiscal year
2017 was about $376 billion.
In the US markets
are large that's
about 57 percent of
the total around the globe.
Another area which
will define a bit in a
second the residential sector
for real estate so 5.3
million homes what
are called existing
homes and almost 670
thousand new homes
being sold in 2018.
That's a measure of size by
volume of trades or transactions.
There were about 86,000
real estate brokerage firms
in the United States.
Again, from the most recent
economic census data we have
available to us and 2 million
active real estate license,
that is to say those
who are qualified as
brokers to sell real estate
in the United States.
It's big by many
different measures
from many different perspectives.
In addition, many
professional asset allocators
and investors are expected
real estate to expand
although there are
some immediate concerns
about what some would call
bubbles in certain areas.
Increasing allocation to
real assets as part of
investment plans has
been democratized,
you might have heard of
the famous endowment
model followed
by university endowments
and foundations that
allocate to
tangible asset classes
of which real estate is at
the heart or even individuals
who might purchase
real estate in some sense.
Although, there are
some trends against
some demographics especially
in the US especially
those we might call
millennials as
we've discussed who have
different preferences
over owning some areas
of real estate.
Appreciation or rate of
return or ROR has been
ongoing in positive in the US
and around the world over
recent historical periods.
On the graph you
see in front of you
is what we call the
net drift data.
Moving across multiple what
we call sectors in real estate.
Apartment, buildings, office
buildings or office spaces,
industrial properties,
retail properties,
and then hotels roughly
speaking although
variances can occur
generally thought to
be from lower risk
on the left to higher is
less Prosecco on the left and
more Prosecco on the right.
In other words, more attuned
or connected to
the macro economy.
Then within those
sub-sectors suburban
office space versus central
business district or CBD,
malls versus retail centers
or apartments and hotels
treated separately.
What you see is over
longer-term data available
historical time periods.
Real estate overall has
produced returns that are of
the same order of magnitude
say of US or global equities.
You can see apartments have
including all returns that
is coming from cash flow plus
price appreciation has
been around 10 percent.
In the last five years, is
little bit less around 8.6
percent and over
the most recent year
available 2017 to 2018
about 6.3 percent.
There is variation
across classes,
industrial properties
have appreciated on
average more and we might say
that suburban offerings
office space
in the aggregate as
appreciated less.
But one thing is clear,
it's been positive.
It has been positive
across diverse kinds of
real estate and it's been
an area of organic growth.
It's not to say though
that's resulted in
forward-looking valuations
that are at historical peaks.
In fact one way one statistic
useful for measuring by
either expected real
estate returns or
current what are called
yields on real estates
are to look at cap rates.
Cap rate stands for
capitalization rate,
and it's essentially the rate
of cash flows coming
from a property scaled
by the value of the price
of the property,
it's often compared to
a dividend yield in
stocks or yield on bonds.
Here you can see
a rate spread compared to
the 10 year government
bond yield as
of the third quarter of 2018
and the end of 2017.
It's a comparable spread in
part because real estate is often
held over longer
holding periods than
say a typical stop
can or might be held.
Although certainly people
hold stocks for a long time,
and it serves as a benchmark
spread real estate has and is
expected to earn based on
current cap rates more than
US government bonds.
But those spreads have actually
decreased in very recent times.
Still, in part because of risk,
in part because afford
living expectations,
they tended to have yields or
cash flow percentages
above US treasuries.
As you can see there's diversity
both across type of property
and geographic location in
the yield spreads for example.
Although, they're of
the same order of
magnitude office space in
Asia and or Asia Pacific in
the aggregate has earned
or is expected to
earn on the basis of
capitalization rates,
greater yield than
office space in Europe.
So again across office
retail and other spaces and
Asia US in Europe we do
see some historical and
current differences in yields.